Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berserker
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

In the Old Norse written corpus, berserkers (Old Norse: berserkir) were Scandinavian warriors who were said to have fought in a trance-like fury, a characteristic which later gave rise to the modern English adjective berserk 'furiously violent or out of control'. Berserkers are attested to in numerous Old Norse sources.

ETYMOLOGY

The Old Norse form of the word was berserkr (plural berserkir), a compound word of ber and serkr. The second part, serkr, means 'shirt' (also found in Middle English, see serk). The first part, ber, is assumed to have most likely meant 'bear', with the full word berserkr meaning 'bear-shirt' — someone who wears a coat made out of a bear's skin. Thirteenth-century historian Snorri Sturluson, who lived around 200 years after berserkers were outlawed in Iceland in 1015, interpreted the meaning as 'bare-shirt' (warriors who went into battle without armour), but that view has largely been abandoned due to contradicting and lack of supporting evidence.

EARLY BEGINNINGS AND ANIMAL CULTS

It is proposed by some authors that the northern warrior tradition originated from hunting magic. Three main animal cults appear to have developed: the cult of the bear, the wolf, and the wild boar.

Germanic Mercenaries in the Roman Army

The bas-relief carvings on Trajan's Column in Rome, completed in 113 AD, depict scenes of Trajan's conquest of Dacia in 101–106 AD. Scene 36 on the column shows Germanic warriors wearing bearhoods and wolfhoods standing together. This is the only potential record of Germanic bear-warriors and wolf-warriors fighting together until 872 AD, when Thórbiörn Hornklofi's description of the battle of Hafrsfjord mentions them fighting together for King Harald Fairhair of Norway.

Migration Period Depictions

- Golden Horns of Gallehus: Two extensively decorated horns made of sheet gold, discovered in Southern Jutland, Denmark in 1639 and 1734. The larger horn depicts two animal-headed men facing each other, armed with a sickle and a wood-splitting axe. Dated to the early 5th century; could represent something related to berserkers.
- Torslunda plates: Four Vendel era cast-bronze dies found in 1870 in a cairn in Torslunda parish, Öland, Sweden. One shows what appears to be a berserker ritual.
- Gutenstein scabbard: Found in 1887 near Sigmaringen, Germany. A silver sword scabbard featuring a warrior figure with a wolf's head, holding a sword and a spear. Thought to depict an ulfheðinn (wolf warrior).
- Gundestrup cauldron: Found in northern Jutland, Denmark in 1891; dated from 200 BC to 300 AD. Features an antlered figure.

TYPES OF WARRIORS

Berserkers — Bear Warriors

Berserkers drew their power from the bear and were devoted to the bear cult, once widespread across the northern hemisphere. The Svarfdæla saga tells of a berserker who postponed a challenge to single-combat until three days after Yule (maintaining religious observances). The bodies of dead berserkers were laid out in bearskins prior to funeral rites.

In battle, berserkers were subject to fits of frenzy: they would howl like wild beasts, foam at the mouth, and gnaw the rims of their shields. According to belief, during these fits they were immune to steel and fire, and made great havoc in the ranks of the enemy. When this fever abated, they were weak and tame.

To "go berserk" was to "hamask" ('change form') — entering a state of wild fury. Some scholars interpreted those who could transform as "hamrammr" ('shapestrong') — literally able to shapeshift into a bear's form. The Saga of Hrólf Kraki tells the story of Bödvar Bjarki, a berserker able to shapeshift into a bear: "Men saw that a great bear went before King Hrolf's men, keeping always near the king. He slew more men with his fore paws than any five of the king's champions."

Ulfheðnar — Wolf Warriors

Frenzy warriors wearing skins of wolves called ulfheðnar ('wolf-skin-ers' or possibly 'wolf-heathens'; singular ulfheðinn) are mentioned in the Vatnsdæla saga, the Haraldskvæði, and the Grettis saga. They are consistently referred to as a group of berserkers, always presented as the elite following of King Harald Fairhair. They were said to wear the pelt of a wolf over their chainmail when they entered battle.

Egil's Saga features Kveldulf (Evening-Wolf), said to have transformed into a wolf at night. Ulfheðnar are sometimes described as Odin's special warriors: "[Odin's] men went without their mailcoats and were mad as hounds or wolves, bit their shields...they slew men, but neither fire nor iron had effect upon them. This is called 'going berserk.'"

The Torslunda helm-plate press depicts a one-eyed warrior (assumed to be Odin) next to a wolf-headed warrior armed with a spear and sword (assumed to be a berserker with a wolf pelt).

Jǫfurr — Proposed Boar Warriors

In Norse poetry, the word jǫfurr (originally 'wild boar') is used metaphorically for 'a prince, monarch or warrior.' It has been proposed that similar to berserkers, warriors could ritually transform into boars to gain strength, bravery and protection in battle, linked to wearing boar helmets as ritual costume.

KEY ATTESTATIONS

- Haraldskvæði (late 9th century): Earliest surviving reference to the term "berserker," composed by Thórbiörn Hornklofi in honor of King Harald Fairhair. References berserkers as ulfheðnar ("men clad in wolf skins").
- Snorri Sturluson (1179–1241) in Ynglinga saga: "His (Odin's) men rushed forwards without armour, were as mad as dogs or wolves, bit their shields, and were strong as bears or wild oxen, and killed people at a blow, but neither fire nor iron told upon them. This was called Berserkergang."
- King Harald Fairhair used berserkers as "shock troops" to broaden his sphere of influence.
- Other Scandinavian kings used berserkers as part of their hirdmen (household troops), sometimes ranked equivalent to a royal bodyguard.
- In 1015, Jarl Eiríkr Hákonarson of Norway outlawed berserkers.
- Grágás (medieval Icelandic law code) sentenced berserker warriors to outlawry.
- By the 12th century, organized berserker war-bands had disappeared.
- The Lewis Chessmen (found on Isle of Lewis, Outer Hebrides, Scotland; of Norse manufacture) include berserkers depicted biting their shields.

DESCRIPTION OF BERSERKERGANG (BERSERK FRENZY)

"This fury, which was called berserkergang, occurred not only in the heat of battle, but also during laborious work. Men who were thus seized performed things which otherwise seemed impossible for human power. This condition is said to have begun with shivering, chattering of the teeth, and chill in the body, and then the face swelled and changed its colour. With this was connected a great hot-headedness, which at last gave over into a great rage, under which they howled as wild animals, bit the edge of their shields, and cut down everything they met without discriminating between friend or foe. When this condition ceased, a great dulling of the mind and feebleness followed, which could last for one or several days."

THEORIES ABOUT BERSERKER BEHAVIOR

1. Drug-induced: Some scholars propose berserker rage was induced by consumption of hallucinogenic mushrooms, massive amounts of alcohol, or a mixture called 'butotens.' Seeds belonging to black henbane (Hyoscyamus niger) were discovered in a Viking grave near Fyrkat, Denmark in 1977. An analysis of Hyoscyamus niger symptoms revealed they are similar to symptoms ascribed to the berserker state.
2. Self-induced hysteria: Initiated before battle through ritualistic performance (shield-biting, animalistic howling).
3. Epilepsy or mental illness.
4. PTSD connection: Scholar Jonathan Shay connects berserker rage to hyperarousal of posttraumatic stress disorder.
5. Byzantine connection: Scholar Hilda Ellis-Davidson draws a parallel between berserkers and a "Gothic Dance" performed by the Norse Varangian Guard in Byzantine service (as mentioned by Emperor Constantine VII, CE 905–959 in De cerimoniis aulae byzantinae), performed wearing animal skins and masks.

FOUR TYPES OF BERSERKER IN SAGAS

1. The King's Berserkr (bodyguard/elite soldier)
2. The Hall-Challenging Berserkr
3. The Hólmgangumaðr (dueling specialist)
4. The Viking Berserkr

Over time, sagas began portraying berserkers less as heroes and more as boasters, ravenous men who loot, plunder, and kill indiscriminately. By Christian interpreters, the berserker was viewed as a "heathen devil."
