Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hervor
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

Hervör (Old Norse: Hervǫr) is the name shared by two female characters in the Tyrfing Cycle, presented in The Saga of Hervör and Heidrek with parts found in the Poetic Edda. The first, the Viking Hervör, challenged her father Angantýr's ghost in his gravemound for his cursed sword Tyrfing. She had a son, Heidrek, father of the other Hervör. The second Hervör was a commander killed in battle. The two are thought by some academics to be the same character, duplicated.

HERVÖR, DAUGHTER OF ANGANTYR

Childhood

Hervör was born after her father Angantyr died during a duel against the Swedish hero Hjalmar. Her mother was Svafa, who was daughter of a Jarl Bjarmar. Rather than take on sewing or be raised as a bond-maid like other girls, Hervör proved to be as strong as the boys and learned archery, swordsmanship, and horse riding. She dressed like a man, fought, killed and pillaged under her male surname Hjörvard. When she learned of her father's identity, she decided to live as her father and to find Tyrfing, the magic sword.

Summoning the Dead

One day, Hervör arrived with her fleet to Munarvágr on Samsø (Samsey), but she was the only one who dared go ashore upon the haunted island. The remainder of her crew feared the nightly activities around the barrows on the island. As she approached the barrows, she saw a fire shining above them, and she approached the largest one. She spoke with a loud voice summoning her father Angantyr to reveal himself, declaring that as his daughter she was entitled to her rightful inheritance — the cursed sword Tyrfing. She also summoned her eleven uncles with such a loud voice and such harsh words that finally her father's voice was heard, asking her not to pursue her quest. She did not give in but continued to demand her rightful inheritance.

Finally, the grave opened, with a fire shining in its center. Hervör saw her father there, and he warned her not to ask for the sword as it would bring death to their whole clan if she used it. Still she persisted. Finally the sword was cast out of the grave, and she eagerly gripped it, bid farewell to her dead kinsmen and walked to the shore. However, when she arrived at the shore, the ships were gone — her crew had been scared away by the fires and the thunder from the barrows.

After Retrieving Tyrfing

Eventually, she managed to leave the island and arrived at the court of Gudmund of Glæsisvellir. She still dressed herself as a man and called herself Hervarðr. Cunningly, she helped the king to win playing tafl. However, she also slew a courtier who tried to unsheathe Tyrfing after she had left it on a chair. Then she resumed her Viking activities and travelled far and wide.

Settling Down

After a while she grew tired of adventures and returned to her foster-father Bjartmar. At Bjartmar's residence, she began sewing and embroidering like other girls, and was considered to be a beautiful and good-mannered girl. King Gudmund's son Höfund arrived to ask for her hand, and she agreed. The old king Gudmund arranged a grand wedding and entrusted the kingdom to the young couple. They lived happily and had two sons named Angantyr and Heidrek. The sword Tyrfing continued its ill work — Heidrek slew his brother Angantyr with the sword.

HERVÖR, DAUGHTER OF HEIDREK

Heidrek had a daughter whom he named Hervör. She was a shieldmaiden and was the commander of a Gothic fort facing Myrkviðr. She fell in battle against the Huns (see Hlöd, Hlöðskviða). When her foster-father Ormar reported Hervör's death to king Angantyr, he said that she had been killed. When King Angantyr heard this, he grinned and was slow to speak, but at last he said: "Óbróðurliga vartu leikin, in ágæta systir." ("Unbrotherly the bloody game they played with you, excellent sister.")

THE CURSED SWORD TYRFING

Tyrfing is the central artifact of the Tyrfing Cycle. It is a magical sword associated with the family of Hervor. The sword had been crafted by dwarves and was cursed to cause death whenever it was drawn, including to members of the wielder's own clan. Angantyr possessed the sword and it passed to Hervör after she claimed it from his grave. The sword continued causing deaths through subsequent generations — Heidrek used it to kill his own brother Angantyr, fulfilling the curse.
