Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hrungnir
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

HRUNGNIR

Hrungnir (Old Norse: meaning 'brawler', or alternatively 'big person, strong man', 'noise-maker') is a jötunn in Norse mythology. He is described as made of stone and is ultimately killed in a duel with the thunder god Thor.

Prior to his demise, Hrungnir engaged in a wager with Odin in which Odin stakes his head on his horse, Sleipnir, being faster than Hrungnir's steed Gullfaxi. During the race, which Sleipnir wins, Hrungnir enters Ásgard, and there becomes drunk and abusive. After they grow weary of him, the gods call on Thor to battle Hrungnir. He is slain by Thor's hammer Mjölnir.

Hrungnir is comparable to the Hurrian Ullikummi, a stone-giant who grew so quickly that he reached the heavens. He was slain by the thunder-god Teshub who is equivalent also to the Luwian Tarḫunz and Hittite Tarḫunna.

PROSE EDDA ACCOUNT (SKÁLDSKAPARMÁL, 13TH CENTURY, BY SNORRI STURLUSON)

The god Odin rides his horse Sleipnir into Jötunheim when he meets the jötunn Hrungnir, mounted on his horse Gullfaxi (Gold-mane). They have a short verbal exchange about the quality of their respective horses, during which Odin states his willingness to bet his head (his life) on the result. Hrungnir declares that he has "a horse that must be much longe-paced, it is called Gullfaxi." Hrungnir gets angry, leaps upon his horse and follows Odin in a race towards Ásgard, "intending to pay him back for his boasting."

Although Sleipnir turns out to be the fastest horse, the race is very close and Odin is not able to keep Hrungnir out of Ásgard. There, the Æsir invite Hrungnir for a drink.

Hrungnir becomes so intoxicated that he threatens to remove "Val-hall and take it to Giantland" and to "bury Asgard and kill all the gods", besides the beautiful goddesses Freyja and Sif whom he intends to keep for himself. The gods then call Thor to expel the unwanted guest, and the two agree to a duel.

THE DUEL

Thor arrives at the duel with his servant Þjálfi. Hrungnir is escorted by Mokkurkálfi ('Mist-calf'), a mighty creature made of clay, and with the heart of a mare. Mokkurkálfi "wets himself" at the sight of Thor, whereas Hrungnir — whose heart, head, and shield appear to be made of stone — is "standing unguardedly."

From Skáldskaparmál (chapter 17, trans. A. Faulkes, 1987):
"Then he saw Thor in an As-rage, he was travelling at an enormous rate and swung his hammer and threw it from a great distance at Hrungnir. Hrungnir raised the whet stone with both hands, threw it in return. It met the hammer in flight, the whetstone, and the whetstone broke in two. One piece fell to the ground, and from it have come all whetstone rocks. The other piece crashed into Thor's head so that he fell forwards to the ground, but the hammer Miollnir hit the middle of Hrungnir's head and shattered his skull into small fragments, and he fell forwards over Thor so that his leg lay across Thor's neck. Thialfi attacked Mokkurkalfi, and he fell with little glory."

After the fight, Thor is stuck under Hrungnir's leg. Thor's three-year-old son Magni is the only one able to lift up the gigantic leg among all the present Æsir. As a reward, Thor gives him Hrungnir's horse Gullfaxi. Odin protests that Thor did wrong to give the good horse to the son of a giantess, and not to his father.

The whetstone fragment remained in Thor's head — the mythological explanation for why whetsones must not be thrown across a floor (it would stir in Thor's head).

SKALDIC POETRY

Haustlöng (Autumn-long, stanzas 14-20), a poem by the early 10th-century skald Þjóðólfr of Hvinir, depicts Thor's journey to the duel while cosmological elements react: "the ground all low (earth) is battered with hail" and "all the hawk's sanctuaries (the skies) are in flame."

In Ragnarsdrápa, the 9th-century skald Bragi Boddason mentions "Hrungnir's skull-splitter" (Mjölnir). Bragi also refers to Hrungnir as the "thief of Þrúðr", the daughter of Thor — suggesting a possible original motivation for the duel involving Hrungnir's abduction of Thor's daughter.

THEORIES

Scholar John Lindow notes that the reaction of cosmological elements during Thor's journey in Haustlöng "suggests the cosmic nature of Thor's duel with Hrungnir."

Georges Dumézil argues that the story involves the initiation of Þjálfi by Thor in the killing of the clay-made monster Mokkurkálfi.

SOURCES
- Skáldskaparmál (Prose Edda, 13th century, Snorri Sturluson)
- Haustlöng (Þjóðólfr of Hvinir, early 10th century)
- Ragnarsdrápa (Bragi Boddason, 9th century)
