Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hymir
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

HYMIR

Hymir (Old Norse: etymology unclear, perhaps related to Norwegian 'humen' meaning 'limp, weary' or 'humre' meaning 'whinny'; Andy Orchard proposed the translation 'creeper') is a jötunn in Norse mythology, and the owner of a brewing-cauldron fetched by the thunder god Thor for Ægir, who wants to hold a feast for the Æsir (gods).

In Hymiskviða, Hymir is portrayed as the father of Týr. However, in Skáldskaparmál, Odin is Týr's father — an inconsistency in the sources. Scholar John Lindow notes this may be a unique situation in Norse mythology: if Loki also has a jötunn father (Fárbauti), he is only "enumerated among the Æsir" as Snorri Sturluson puts it in Gylfaginning, and thus not really part of their group.

Hymir is often used in kennings as a modifier for jötnar.

HYMISKVIÐA — THE CAULDRON AND THE FISHING TRIP

Hymiskviða recounts how Thor and Týr obtain the brewing cauldron from Hymir. Hymir's skull is unusually hard, and Thor breaks a cup by throwing it at Hymir's head rather than against a pillar.

Hymiskviða also recounts Thor's fishing for Jörmungandr, the Midgard Serpent. Thor goes fishing with Hymir, using the head of Hymir's best ox for bait, and catches Jörmungandr. The serpent then either breaks loose (as told in Hymiskviða) or, as told in the Gylfaginning of the Prose Edda, is cut loose by Hymir.

The Prose Edda provides the additional detail that while Thor was attempting to pull Jörmungandr in, his feet went through the bottom of the boat.

In Hymiskviða, before the fishing trip, Thor secures his goats Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr with a man named Egil in the realm of Midgard before continuing to Hymir's hall.

PICTURE STONES

The encounter between Thor and Jörmungandr appears to have been one of the most popular motifs in Norse art. Three picture stones have been linked with the story and show Hymir:
1. The Ardre VIII image stone
2. The Hørdum stone
3. The Gosforth Cross (also: a second stone slab at Gosforth showing a fishing scene using an ox head for bait)

The legend is also depicted on the Altuna Runestone, but its image does not show Hymir, possibly due to the narrow shape of that stone.

SOURCES
- Hymiskviða (Poetic Edda)
- Gylfaginning (Prose Edda, Snorri Sturluson, 13th century)
- Skáldskaparmál (Prose Edda)
- Ardre VIII image stone, Hørdum stone, Gosforth Cross (archaeological evidence)
