Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagertha
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

Lagertha, according to legend, was a Viking ruler and shield-maiden from what is now Norway, and the onetime wife of the famous Viking Ragnar Lodbrok. Her tale was recorded by the chronicler Saxo Grammaticus in the 12th century. Her name as recorded by Saxo is Lathgertha. It has also been recorded as Lagertha, Ladgertha, Ladgerda or similar.

SOURCE: GESTA DANORUM BY SAXO GRAMMATICUS

Lagertha's tale is recorded in passages in the ninth book of the Gesta Danorum, a twelfth-century work of Danish history by the Christian historian Saxo Grammaticus.

The Origin of Her Warrior Career

According to the Gesta (paragraphs 9.4.1–9.4.11), Lagertha's career as a warrior began when Frø, king of Sweden, invaded Norway and killed the Norwegian king Siward. Frø put the women of the dead king's family into a brothel for public humiliation. Hearing of this, Ragnar Lodbrok came with an army to avenge his grandfather Siward. Many of the women Frø had ordered abused dressed themselves in men's clothing and fought on Ragnar's side. Chief among them, and key to Ragnar's victory, was Lagertha.

Saxo recounts: "Ladgerda, a skilled Amazon, who, though a maiden, had the courage of a man, and fought in front among the bravest with her hair loose over her shoulders. All marvelled at her matchless deeds, for her locks flying down her back betrayed that she was a woman."

Marriage to Ragnar

Impressed with her courage, Ragnar courted Lagertha from afar. Lagertha feigned interest, and Ragnar arrived to seek her hand, bidding his companions wait in the Gaular valley. He was set upon by a bear and a great hound which Lagertha had guarding her home, but killed the bear with his spear and choked the hound to death. Thus, he won Lagertha's hand. According to Saxo, Ragnar had a son with her, Fridleif, as well as two daughters, whose names are not recorded.

Divorce

After returning to Denmark to fight a civil war, Ragnar (who was still annoyed that Lagertha had set beasts against him) divorced Lagertha to marry Þóra borgarhjǫrtr, daughter of Herrauðr, jarl of Västergötland.

The Battle Aid

Ragnar later sent to Norway for support while faced again with civil war in Denmark. Lagertha, who still loved him, came to his aid with 120 ships. When at the height of the battle, Ragnar's son Siward was wounded, Lagertha saved the day for Ragnar with a counter-attack. Saxo describes: "Ladgertha, who had a matchless spirit though a delicate frame, covered by her splendid bravery the inclination of the soldiers to waver. For she made a sally about, and flew round to the rear of the enemy, taking them unawares, and thus turned the panic of her friends into the camp of the enemy."

Killing Her Husband

Upon returning to Norway after the battle, Lagertha quarrelled with her husband and slew him with a spearhead she concealed in her gown. Saxo concludes that she then "usurped the whole of his name and sovereignty; for this most presumptuous dame thought it pleasanter to rule without her husband than to share the throne with him."

SCHOLARLY ANALYSIS

According to Judith Jesch, the rich variety of tales in the first nine books of Saxo's Gesta are "generally considered to be largely fictional." In portraying warrior women, Saxo drew on the legend of the Amazons from classical antiquity, but also on a variety of Old Norse (particularly Icelandic) sources. Saxo's depiction of women warriors is also colored by misogyny — like most churchmen of the time, Saxo thought of women only as sexual beings.

When Saxo describes Lagertha as "flying round" (circumvolare) to the rear of the enemy, he ascribes to her the power of flight, according to Jesch, indicating a kinship with the valkyries. The tale notably recalls that of Kára, the valkyrie lover of Helgi Haddingjaskati.

Identity with Thorgerd

Hilda Ellis Davidson deems it possible that Lagertha is identical with Þorgerðr Hǫlgabúðr (Thorgerd), a goddess worshipped by the Norwegian ruler Haakon Sigurdsson (c. 937–995), who lived at Hlaðir (Lade). Lagertha's likely name in Old Norse would be Hlaðgerðr. Gaulardal, the Gaular valley — where Lagertha lived according to Saxo — lies nearby and was the center of Thorgerd's cult.

A woman called Hlaðgerðr who rules the Hlaðeyjar also appears in the sagas of the 6th century Scylding king Halfdan — she gives him twenty ships to help defeat his enemies.

KEY FACTS

- Nationality: Norwegian
- Status: Viking ruler, shield-maiden
- Husband (first): Ragnar Lodbrok (divorced)
- Children with Ragnar: son Fridleif, two daughters (unnamed)
- Second husband: unnamed, killed by Lagertha with a concealed spearhead
- Primary source: Gesta Danorum, Book IX, by Saxo Grammaticus (12th century)
- Modern adaptation: Portrayed by Katheryn Winnick in History Channel series Vikings (2013–2020)
- Historical basis: Largely considered fictional; possibly derived from myths about the Norse deity Thorgerd
