Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Megingjord (redirects to Megingjörð)
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

MEGINGJÖRÐ (THE BELT OF STRENGTH)

In Norse mythology, the megingjörð (Old Norse: megingjǫrð, IPA ˈmeɣenˌɡjɔrð, meaning "power-belt") is a belt worn by the god Thor. The Old Norse name megin means power or strength, and gjörð means belt.

According to the Prose Edda, the belt is one of Thor's three main possessions, along with the hammer Mjölnir and the iron gloves Járngreipr. When worn, the belt is described as doubling Thor's already prodigious strength.

ATTESTATIONS

ÞÓRSDRÁPA (SKALDIC POEM)

In verse seven of the skaldic poem Þórsdrápa (Thorsdrapa, Lay of Thor) written by the 10th-century poet Eilífr Goðrúnarson in the service of Jarl Hákon Sigurðarson, there is a reference to Thor's power-belt. The line "njótr njarðgjarðar" literally means "he who benefits from the mighty belt", referring to Thor's magical belt/girdle of strength/power, Megingjörð.

GYLFAGINNING (PROSE EDDA)

In Gylfaginning (the first part of Snorri Sturluson's Prose Edda, after the Prologue), verse 45 refers to Thor's power-belt. The Old Norse text reads:
"En er kom at dagan, þá gekk Þórr út ok sér mann, hvar lá skammt frá honum í skóginum, ok var sá eigi lítill. Hann svaf ok hraut sterkliga. Þá þóttist Þórr skilja, hvat látum verit hafði of nóttina. Hann spennir sik megingjarðum, ok óx honum ásmegin."

Translation: "He girded himself with his belt of strength, and his divine strength grew" — referring to Thor girding himself with Megingjörð when confronting the giant Skrýmir.

CLASSIFICATION

The megingjörð is one of Thor's three great treasures:
1. Mjölnir — the hammer
2. Járngreipr — the iron gloves (needed to grip Mjölnir)
3. Megingjörð — the belt of strength (doubles Thor's strength when worn)

SOURCES
- Gylfaginning verse 45 (Prose Edda, Snorri Sturluson, 13th century)
- Þórsdrápa (Eilífr Goðrúnarson, 10th century, in service of Jarl Hákon Sigurðarson)
- Andy Orchard, Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend (1997)
