Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ragnar_Lodbrok
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

Ragnar Lodbrok (Old Norse: Ragnarr loðbrók, lit. 'Ragnar hairy-breeches'), according to legends, was a Viking hero and a Swedish and Danish king. He is known from Old Norse poetry of the Viking Age, Icelandic sagas, and near-contemporary chronicles. According to traditional literature, Ragnar distinguished himself by conducting many raids against the British Isles and the Carolingian Empire during the 9th century.

FAMILY AND LINEAGE

According to the Tale of Ragnar Lodbrok, Tale of Ragnar's Sons, Heimskringla, Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks, Sögubrot af nokkrum fornkonungum, and many other Icelandic sources, Ragnar was the son of the king of Sweden Sigurd Ring. Sigurd Ring's father was Randver, a king of Denmark whose wife was Åsa. Randver was the son of Ráðbarðr the king of Garðaríki, and a grandson of the legendary Scandinavian king Ivar Vidfamne. Sigurd Ring became chief king of Sweden after Randver's death and fought the Battle of the Brávellir (Bråvalla) on the plains of Östergötland against Harald Wartooth, where Harald died. Sigurd is sometimes identified with a Danish king Sigfred who ruled from about 770 until his death prior to 804. He sired Ragnar Lodbrok with the princess Alfhild of the petty kingdom of Álfheimr.

WIVES AND SONS

Ragnar's first deed in the sagas was killing a giant snake that guarded the abode of the Geatish jarl Herrauð's daughter Thora Borgarhjort, thereby winning her as his wife. The unusual protective clothes Ragnar wore when attacking the serpent earned him the nickname Lodbrok ('hairy-breeches'). His sons with Thora were Erik and Agnar. After Thora died, he discovered Kráka, a woman of outstanding beauty and wisdom living with a poor peasant couple in Norway, and married her. This marriage resulted in the sons Ivar the Boneless, Björn Ironside, Hvitserk, Ragnvald, and Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye. Kráka was later revealed to actually be Aslaug, a secret daughter of the renowned hero Sigurd Fafnesbane.

According to Saxo Grammaticus in Gesta Danorum (c. 1200), Ragnar's first marriage was to the shieldmaiden Lagertha (Ladgerda), whom Ragnar won after killing a bear and a great hound. With Lagertha he sired the son Fridleif and two daughters. Ragnar later repudiated Lagertha and married Thora Borgarhjort. His sons with Thora (per Saxo) are Radbard, Dunvat, Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye, Björn Ironside, Agnar and Ivar the Boneless. A non-marital relationship produced Ubbe. A final marriage to Svanlaug (possibly another name for Aslaug) produced Ragnvald, Eric Weatherhat and Hvitserk.

DEATH

As the sons grew up to become renowned warriors, Ragnar resolved to conquer England with merely two ships. He was defeated by superior Northumbrian forces under King Ælla of Northumbria and was thrown into a snake pit to die. While in the pit, accounts say none of the snakes would bite him for a time. His death song is recounted in the poem Krakumal ('Kráka's lay'), put in the mouth of the dying Ragnar.

SONS AND THE GREAT HEATHEN ARMY

The Great Heathen Army invaded England at around 866, led by the sons of Ragnar Lodbrok to avenge their father against King Ælla of Northumbria. The organizers included Ivar the Boneless, Ubba, Halfdan, Björn Ironside, Hvitserk, and Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye. Ivar the Boneless was the leader from 865 to 870. The Knutsdrapa of Sigvat Thordarson (c. 1038) mentions the death of Ælla at the hands of Ivar in York, who "carved the eagle on Ælla's back."

Halfdan Ragnarsson became the leader of the Great Heathen Army in about 870. The Danes battled the West Saxons nine times, including the Battle of Ashdown on 8 January 871. Halfdan accepted a truce from the future Alfred the Great. Björn Ironside, according to late sagas, became King of Sweden and Uppsala. Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye is perhaps the same person as Sigfred, who was king in Denmark together with Halfdan in 873 and possibly succeeded Halfdan as King of Denmark around 877.

DANISH SOURCES

The Chronicon Roskildense (c. 1138) mentions Lodbrok (Lothpardus) as the father of the Norse King Ywar and his brothers Inguar, Ubbi, Byorn and Ulf. The chronicle of Sven Aggesen (c. 1190) is the first Danish text to mention the full name Regnerus Lothbrogh. Saxo Grammaticus in Gesta Danorum (c. 1200) provides the most elaborate Danish account, identifying Ragnar as a Danish king and blending historical and mythical elements.

FRANKISH ACCOUNTS

The Siege of Paris and the Sack of Paris of 845 were led by a Norse chieftain named "Reginherus" or Ragnar, often tentatively identified with the legendary Ragnar Lodbrok. Ragnar's Vikings raided Rouen on their way up the Seine in 845. King Charles the Bald assembled an army divided into two parts, one for each side of the river. Ragnar attacked and defeated one division, took 111 prisoners and hanged them on an island in the Seine to honor Odin. Ragnar's fleet returned to the Danish King Horik I, but Ragnar soon died from a violent illness.

POETIC AND EPIGRAPHIC SOURCES

The Ragnarsdrápa, attributed to the 9th-century poet Bragi Boddason, praises a Ragnar, son of Sigurd. There is one runic inscription mentioning Lodbrok, carved on the prehistoric tumulus of Maeshowe on Orkney in the early 12th century, reading: "This howe was built a long time before Lodbrok's. Her sons, they were bold; scarcely ever were there such tall men of their hands."

HISTORICAL ACCURACY

Contemporary academia regards most stories about Ragnar as fiction, though his sons Ivar the Boneless, Halfdan Ragnarsson, Björn Ironside, Ubba and Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye are historical figures. The most significant medieval sources include Book IX of Gesta Danorum (Saxo Grammaticus, 12th century), the Tale of Ragnar's Sons (Ragnarssona þáttr), the Tale of Ragnar Lodbrok, the Ragnarsdrápa, and the Krákumál. Historical candidates scholars associate with the "real" Ragnar include: Reginherus who besieged Paris in 845, Danish King Horik I (d. 854), and King Reginfrid (d. 814).
