Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Starkad
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

Starkad (Old Norse: Starkaðr or Stǫrkuðr; Latin: Starcaterus; modern Danish: Stærkodder) was either an eight-armed giant or the human grandson of the aforementioned giant in Norse mythology. Starkad appears in numerous accounts relating to different Scandinavian traditions. He is most fully treated in Gesta Danorum but also appears in Icelandic sources. He is portrayed as a great warrior who performed many heroic deeds but also many crimes. A cognate of the Starkad legends can be found in the Anglo-Saxon poem Beowulf.

ORIGIN AND FAMILY

In Hervarar saga, a Starkad Ala-Warrior lived in northern Norway at the waterfalls of Alufoss. He descended from the giants known as the þursar (jotuns), and his father's name was Storkvid. Starkad had eight arms. He was betrothed to a girl named Ogn Elf-burst, but when a giant named Hergrim kidnapped Ogn, Starkad challenged Hergrim to a holmgang. Starkad used four swords at the same time and slew Hergrim. Ogn committed suicide by stabbing herself with a sword. Starkad then kidnapped Álfhildr, the daughter of king Álfr of Álfheim. King Álfr called on the god Thor, who killed Starkad and rescued the girl.

THE GRANDSON: BLESSINGS AND CURSES

Gautreks saga continues the account. Young Starkad (son of Stórvirkr, who was son of Starkad Ala-Warrior) was raised at the court of Harald, the king of Agder, together with Harald's son Vikar. Herþjófr, the king of Hordaland, raided and killed king Harald, taking Vikar hostage. When Vikar had grown up, he assembled a warband including Starkad, and avenged his father by killing Herþjófr.

Odin's Blessings (given at a secret council of the gods):
1. Living three lifetimes
2. Possessing the most excellent of weapons
3. An abundance of riches
4. Victory in battle
5. The gift of poetry
6. Always held in the highest esteem among the rich and powerful

Thor's Curses (because of Starkad's jotun origin):
1. Never having children
2. Committing a crime every lifetime he lived
3. Never possessing real estate
4. Never feeling he had enough property
5. Always receiving dangerous wounds in battle
6. Never remembering his skaldic poems
7. Ever being hated by commoners

THE DEATH OF KING VIKAR

Odin asked Starkad to send him King Víkar in payment for his blessings. Starkad agreed. Odin gave Starkad a spear which Odin promised would appear to be only a reed-stalk. Starkad made a noose of willow and put it around the king's neck in pretense it was only for show. However, the knot was so strong the king was dying, and Starkad gave him the coup de grace with the spear. This was Starkad's first evil deed.

KEY BATTLES AND DEEDS

- Battle at Lake Vænir: Starkad fought for King Vikar in battles for hegemony of petty kingdoms of southern Norway.
- Service under King Haki: Fought during attack on king Hugleik of Ireland. Was defended by Svipdag and Geigad, who gave Starkad the most vicious wound he had ever received.
- Quelling eastern rebellion: Fought against Curonians, Sambians, Semigallians until all Easterlings were defeated.
- Defeated warlord Wisin at Anafial in Russia who could make weapons blunt by looking at them, by covering his sword with a hide.
- Killed the jotun Tanna in Byzantium and the Polish champion Wasce/Wilzce.
- Defeated the Saxon champion Hama in single combat in place of King Frotho.
- Battle of the Brávellir: Starkad fought on the Swedish side for King Sigurd Hring against Harald Wartooth. He fought the formidable Ubbi of Friesland — Starkad gave Ubbi one wound but received six big ones himself. The shieldmaiden Vebiorg attacked Starkad and cut his mouth so that his chin fell; Starkad had to bite his beard to keep his chin in place. Starkad then killed another shieldmaiden, Ursina, who carried Harald Wartooth's banner. Starkad continued fighting until he had a large gash on his neck, a large gash on his chest exposing his lungs, and had lost a finger on his right hand. The battle ended in Swedish victory.
- Killed nine brothers at the moor of Roliung single-handedly, but received seventeen wounds himself.
- In Norna-Gests þáttr: Encountered the hero Sigurd Dragonslayer in battle for Swedish king Sigurd Hring. Sigurd recognized Starkad and dealt him a blow with sword Gramr that ripped two teeth from Starkad's mouth, causing Starkad to retreat.

STARKAD'S DEATH

When Starkad was so old that he wished to die and his eyesight was bad, he hung his gold around his neck and went out to wander. He found a nobleman named Hather (Hatherus, son of Lennius), whom Starkad had previously killed Olo to benefit, at the prompting of Lennius. Starkad sang about his accomplishments and asked Hather to be his slayer. Starkad promised Hather all his gold and imperviousness should Hather cut off his head and run between the head and the body as it fell. Hather cut off Starkad's head but avoided running between the head and body, fearing being crushed by Starkad's huge body. When the head hit the ground, it bit a tussock of grass — a sign of Starkad's ferocity even in death. Hather made a barrow for Starkad on the heath of Roljung, at the same spot where Starkad's heavy body long ago had made an imprint on a stone.

IN YNGLINGA SAGA

In the Ynglinga saga, Swedish king Áli the Bold ruled for twenty-five years until Starkad appeared and killed him, allowing the exiled king Aun to return to his kingdom.

SOURCES

Starkad appears in: Hervarar saga, Gautreks saga, Ynglinga saga, Sögubrot, Norna-Gests þáttr, and most comprehensively in Gesta Danorum by Saxo Grammaticus. A cognate tradition appears in the Old English poem Beowulf (the unnamed old warrior who urges the Heaðobards to revenge against the Danes). Saxo Grammaticus wrote that Starkad was the son of Stórvirkr (Storwerk) and that no man was his equal as he was endowed with superhuman size and noble disposition.
