Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tanngrisnir_and_Tanngnj%C3%B3str
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

TANNGRISNIR AND TANNGNJÓSTR

Tanngrisnir (Old Norse: IPA ˈtɑnːˌɡrisnez̠, literal meaning "teeth barer" or "one that snarls") and Tanngnjóstr (IPA ˈtɑnːˌɡnjoːstz̠, "teeth-grinder", or "one that grinds or gnashes teeth") are the goats who pull the chariot of the god Thor in Norse mythology. They are attested in the Poetic Edda (compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources) and the Prose Edda (written by Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century).

The name Tanngnjóstr is sometimes modernly anglicized as Tanngiost.

Scholar Rudolf Simek comments that the names were young when recorded and may have been inventions of Snorri.

THE GOATS' SPECIAL PROPERTY

The Prose Edda relates that when Thor cooks the goats, their flesh provides sustenance. After Thor resurrects them with his hammer Mjölnir the next day, they are brought back to life. Thor can slaughter and eat the goats each night and resurrect them each morning — provided all bones remain intact.

THE PEASANT STORY AND ÞJÁLFI'S MISTAKE

In Gylfaginning chapter 44, Thor and Loki ride in Thor's chariot pulled by the two goats. They stop at the home of a peasant farmer and are given lodging. Thor slaughters his goats, skins them and puts them in a pot. He invites the peasant family to share the meal.

At the end of the meal, Thor places the goat skins on the opposing side of the fire and tells the peasants to throw the bones onto the goatskins. The peasant's son Þjálfi takes one of the goat ham-bones and uses a knife to split it open, breaking the bone to get to the marrow.

After staying the night, Thor rises before dawn, takes his hammer Mjöllnir, raises it, and blesses the goat skins. The goats are resurrected and stand up, but one of the two goats is lame in the hind leg. Gylfaginning records: "Everyone can imagine how terrified the peasant must have been when he saw Thor making his brows sink down over his eyes; as for what could be seen of the eyes themselves, he thought he would collapse at just the very sight. Thor clenched his hands on the shaft of the hammer so that the knuckles went white."

Thor calms down and accepts the peasant's children Þjálfi and Röskva as servants as compensation. Minus the goats, the four then set out for Jötunheimr.

POETIC EDDA ATTESTATIONS

In the Poetic Edda poem Hymiskviða, Thor secures the goats — described as having "splendid horns" — with a human named Egil in the realm of Midgard before continuing to the jötunn Hymir's hall. Thor is referred to as "lord of goats" later in the same poem.

After Thor kills Hymir and his many-headed army, Thor's goats collapse "half-dead" due to lameness. Hymiskviða says this is the fault of Loki, but notes "you have heard this already" — suggesting a different, parallel version of the Þjálfi story.

A stanza from Þrymskviða (Benjamin Thorpe translation): "Straightway were the goats homeward driven, / hurried to the traces; they had fast to run. / The rocks were shivered, the earth was in a blaze; / Odin's son drove to Jötunheim."

GYLFAGINNING CHAPTER 21

The enthroned figure of High divulges that the god Thor has two goats that drive his chariot and that these goats bear the names Tanngnjóstr and Tanngrisnir.

SKÁLDSKAPARMÁL CHAPTER 75

The names of both goats appear among a list of names for goats.

SCHOLARLY INTERPRETATIONS

Scholar Rudolf Simek connects Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr with the beast Sæhrímnir (consumed nightly by the gods and the einherjar and rejuvenated every day), suggesting this may point to sacrificial rites in shamanic practices.

In Scandinavian folklore, witches who magically replenish food sometimes appear in tales, the food usually being herring. Folk tales describe the breaking of herring bones when eating as a form of precaution (to prevent the same food being regurgitated). Scholars Reimund Kvideland and Henning Sehmsdorf highlight a connection between this folk belief and the Old Norse tales of Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr — both involve bone-breaking ending food rejuvenation.

SOURCES
- Gylfaginning chapters 21 and 44 (Prose Edda, Snorri Sturluson, 13th century)
- Skáldskaparmál chapter 75 (Prose Edda)
- Hymiskviða (Poetic Edda)
- Þrymskviða (Poetic Edda)
