Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%9Ej%C3%A1lfi (redirects to Þjálfi and Röskva)
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

ÞJÁLFI AND RÖSKVA (THJALFI AND ROSKVA)

In Norse mythology, Þjálfi (Old Norse: IPA ˈθjɑːlve) and Röskva (O.N.: Rǫskva, IPA ˈrɔskwɑ), also known as Thjalfi and Roskva, are two siblings — a boy and a girl — who are servants of the god Thor.

Þjálfi receives a single mention in the Poetic Edda, compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional material, while both Þjálfi and Röskva are attested in the Prose Edda, written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, and in poetry of skalds.

ETYMOLOGY

The etymology of the name Þjálfi is unclear. An origin in *þewa-alfaR, meaning "serving-elf", has been proposed. The name appears as a personal name on over 12 runestones in Sweden, including Sö 194, U 56, U 681, U 778, U 867, U 875, U 925, U 948, U 1052, and U Fv1990;32B.

The name Röskva derives from Old Norse "rǫskr", meaning 'fast, quick, brave, skilled.'

HOW THEY BECAME THOR'S SERVANTS (PROSE EDDA, GYLFAGINNING, CHAPTER 44)

Thor and Loki are riding in Thor's chariot pulled by his two goats (Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr). They stop at the home of a peasant farmer and are given lodging for a night. Thor slaughters his goats, skins them and puts them in a pot, and invites the peasant family to share the meal.

At the end of the meal, Thor places the goat skins on the opposing side of the fire and tells the peasants to throw the bones onto the goatskins. The peasant's son Þjálfi takes one of the goat ham-bones and uses a knife to split it open, breaking the bone to get to the marrow.

After staying the night, Thor rises before dawn, takes his hammer Mjöllnir, and blesses the goat skins. The goats are resurrected, but one is lame in the hind leg. Thor becomes enraged — Gylfaginning describes the scene: "Everyone can imagine how terrified the peasant must have been when he saw Thor making his brows sink down over his eyes; as for what could be seen of the eyes themselves, he thought he would collapse at just the very sight. Thor clenched his hands on the shaft of the hammer so that the knuckles went white."

Thor calms down and accepts a settlement: the two children Þjálfi and Röskva become his servants. They have remained so since.

THE JOURNEY TO ÚTGARÐR (PROSE EDDA, GYLFAGINNING)

Thor, Loki, Þjálfi, and Röskva continue east into a vast forest in the realm of Jötunheimr. They spend the night in what turns out to be the immense glove of a giant named Skrýmir, who has been snoring and causing earthquakes throughout the night. Thor attempts to kill the sleeping Skrýmir twice with his hammer, but each time Skrýmir merely wakes and says he detected an acorn or tree debris falling on his head.

The following day the group arrives at Útgarða-Loki's enormous castle. Útgarða-Loki requires visitors to perform a feat. Þjálfi claims he can run a race against anyone. He races a small figure named Hugi three times. In the first race, Hugi runs to the end and back to meet Þjálfi. In the second, Þjálfi loses by an arrow-shot. In the third, he loses again. All agree the contest is decided.

After the group spends the night, Útgarða-Loki reveals that he was in fact Skrýmir and that all the contests were illusions. Þjálfi had raced against thought itself — Hugi meaning "thought" in Old Norse. Útgarða-Loki says everyone was terrified at what the group achieved, and they must part. Útgarða-Loki and his keep disappear.

POETIC EDDA MENTION

In Hárbarðsljóð, Thor tells the ferryman Hárbarðr (Odin in disguise) that he fought she-wolves in Hlesey (the island Læsø in Denmark). Hárbarðr calls this shameful. Thor responds:

(Benjamin Thorpe translation): "She-wolves they were, and scarcely women. / They crushed my ship, which with props I had secured, / with iron clubs threatened me, and drove away Thiâlfi."

(Henry Adams Bellows translation): "She-wolves they were like, and women little; / My ship, which well I had trimmed, did they shake; / With clubs of iron they threatened, and Thjalfi they drove off."

SKÁLDSKAPARMÁL

In Skáldskaparmál (chapter 4), ways of referring to Thor include "lord of Þjálfi and Röskva." A quote from Þórsdrápa by the 10th-century skald Eilífr Goðrúnarson refers to Þjálfi as "Röskva's brother."

ROLE IN THE BATTLE WITH HRUNGNIR

When Thor fights the giant Hrungnir, Þjálfi defeats Hrungnir's clay companion Mokkurkálfi. From Skáldskaparmál: "Thialfi attacked Mokkurkalfi, and he fell with little glory."

SOURCES
- Gylfaginning (Prose Edda, Snorri Sturluson, 13th century)
- Skáldskaparmál (Prose Edda)
- Hárbarðsljóð (Poetic Edda)
- Þórsdrápa (Eilífr Goðrúnarson, 10th century skald)
