Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thrym (redirects to Þrymr)
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

ÞRYMR (THRYM)

In Norse mythology, Þrymr (Thrymr, Thrym; meaning "noise") was a jötunn (giant). He is the namesake of the Eddic poem Þrymskviða, in which he stole Thor's hammer Mjölnir, and the same tale is told in Þrymlur. Another mention of Þrymr is in the þulur appended to the Prose Edda, probably deriving from Þrymskviða. Three figures named Þrymr, including a king and a jötunn, are mentioned in Hversu Noregr byggðist.

He is repeatedly described as þursa dróttinn ("lord of thurses"). Scholars have described him as "aggressive, stupid, and bombastic throughout" (McKinnell) and "aggressive, stupid, and bombastic throughout."

THE ÞRYMSKVIÐA (THE THEFT OF MJÖLNIR)

Through Loki, Þrymr conveys his demand for the goddess Freyja's hand in marriage as the price for returning Mjölnir, which he has buried eight leagues under the ground.

When Loki flies to Jötunheimar using Freyja's feather cloak, he finds Þrymr sitting on a mound, twisting gold leashes for his dogs and primping his horses' manes.

To recover his hammer, Thor travels to Jötunheimar disguised as Freyja, in bridal drag. When Þrymr peeps under "her" veil, seeking a kiss from his bride, Thor's glare sends him reeling the length of the hall. Nonetheless, Þrymr is deceived by the explanations of "Freyja's handmaiden" Loki.

Thor regains his weapon when Þrymr has it brought out and laid in Thor's lap to bless their union. Thor then strikes Þrymr dead first, followed by all his assembled kin and following.

HVERSU NOREGR BYGGÐIST

Three figures named Þrymr are mentioned in Hversu Noregr byggðist, which recounts the story of the early settlement of Norway:

1. Þrymr, son of Gard Agdi and ruler of Agder. This Þrymr had sons named Agði and Agnarr.
2. Ketill Þrymr, grandson of the first Þrymr through his son Agnarr. Ketill Þrymr lived in Þrum. (Ketill Þrymr also appears in Gunnars þáttr Þiðrandabana.)
3. Þrymr, the jötunn of Verma. This Þrymr is the father of Bergfinn and Bergdísa. Bergdísa had three children by King Raum the Old, who each inherited land from their father and had further offspring.

SOURCES
- Þrymskviða (Poetic Edda)
- Þrymlur
- Prose Edda (þulur/Nafnaþulur)
- Hversu Noregr byggðist

SCHOLARSHIP
- Rudolf Simek, Dictionary of Northern Mythology (1993): name means "noise"
- John McKinnell: "aggressive, stupid, and bombastic throughout" (Medium Ævum 69.1, 2000)
- John Lindow, Norse Mythology: A Guide to the Gods, Heroes, Rituals, and Beliefs (2001)
