Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urðarbrunnr
Retrieved: 2026-03-25

Urðarbrunnr (Old Norse "Wellspring of Urðr"; either referring to a Germanic concept of fate — urðr — or the norn named Urðr) is a spring or well in Norse mythology. Urðarbrunnr is attested in the Poetic Edda, compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and the Prose Edda, written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson. In both sources, the wellspring lies beneath the world tree Yggdrasil, and is associated with a trio of norns (Urðr, Verðandi, and Skuld). In the Prose Edda, Urðarbrunnr is cited as one of three wellsprings existing beneath three roots of Yggdrasil that reach into three distant, different lands; the other two wellsprings being Hvergelmir, located beneath a root in Niflheim, and Mímisbrunnr, located beneath a root near the home of the frost jötnar.

== The Three Wells of Yggdrasil ==

The world tree Yggdrasil has three roots, each extending to a different realm and associated with one of three great wells:
1. Urðarbrunnr — beneath the root that extends among the Æsir / toward heaven; associated with the Norns and fate
2. Mímisbrunnr — beneath the root near the home of the frost jötnar; associated with wisdom (Odin sacrificed his eye here)
3. Hvergelmir — beneath the root over Niflheim; source of all rivers; home of the dragon Níðhöggr

== Attestations in the Poetic Edda ==

In the Poetic Edda, Urðarbrunnr is mentioned in stanzas 19 and 20 of the poem Völuspá, and stanza 112 of the poem Hávamál. In stanza 19 of Völuspá, Urðarbrunnr is described as being located beneath Yggdrasil, and that Yggdrasil, an ever-green ash-tree, is covered with white mud or loam. Stanza 20 describes that three norns (Urðr, Verðandi, and Skuld) "come from" the well, here described as a "lake", and that this trio of norns then "set down laws, they chose lives, for the sons of men the fates of men."

Stanza 112 of Hávamál has been the matter of much debate and is considered unclear, having been referred to as "mysterious", "obscure and much-debated". Benjamin Thorpe translates the stanza as:

"Time 'tis to discourse from the preacher's chair.
By the well of Urd I silent sat,
I saw and meditated, I listened to men's words."

== Attestations in the Prose Edda (Gylfaginning) ==

In chapter 15 of Gylfaginning, the throned figure of Just-As-High tells Gangleri (described as King Gylfi in disguise) about Yggdrasil and its roots. Just-As-High describes three roots that support Yggdrasil that stretch a great distance. The third root is located "among the Æsir", "extends to heaven" and, beneath it, is the "very holy" Urðarbrunnr. Just-As-High details that, every day, the gods ride over the bridge Bifröst to hold court at the well.

High provides more information in chapter 16. High says that there are many beautiful places in heaven, and "everywhere there is divine protection around it." There, a beautiful hall stands under the ash (Yggdrasil) near the wellspring (Urðarbrunnr), and from this hall come "three maidens" whose names are Urðr, Verðandi, and Skuld. The maidens shape the lives of men, and "we call them norns". High goes on to describe that there are other norns, and their nature.

Further into chapter 16, High states that norns that dwell by Urðarbrunnr take water from the wellspring and mud that lies around it, and pour it over Yggdrasil so that its branches do not decay or rot. The water is described as so holy that anything that enters the wellspring will become "as white as the membrane called the skin that lies round the inside of the eggshell." High then quotes stanza 19 of Völuspá, and states that two swans feed from the wellspring, from which all other swans descend.

== Attestations in the Prose Edda (Skáldskaparmál) ==

Two sections of Skáldskaparmál reference Urðarbrunnr. The first reference is in section 49, where a fragment of a work by the 10th century skald Kormákr Ögmundarson is recited in explaining how "Odin's fire" is a kenning for a sword. The passage reads "A sword is Odin's fire" and references Urðr "rising from the wellspring."

Urðarbrunnr is mentioned a second time in section 52 of Skáldskaparmál, this time associated with Christ. The section quotes the late 10th century skald Eilífr Goðrúnarson, who states that "thus has the powerful king of Rome increased his realm with lands of heath-land divinities" and that Christ is said to have his throne south of Urðarbrunnr. Eilífr is otherwise known as a pagan skald, and this selection has been theorized as describing that Christ had taken over responsibility of providence or fate.

== The Norns at the Well ==

The three Norns who dwell at Urðarbrunnr are:
- Urðr (also spelled Wyrd): Associated with what has been; her name is related to the word for "fate" or "that which has come to pass"
- Verðandi: Associated with what is becoming, the present
- Skuld: Associated with what shall be, the future; she also appears among the valkyries

The Norns carve runes or set down laws that determine the fates and lifespans of men. Every day the gods themselves ride over Bifröst to hold council at the well of Urðr, making it the divine meeting place for the Æsir.

== The Sacred White Water ==

The water of Urðarbrunnr is described as so sacred that anything that enters the well becomes white as an eggshell. The Norns use the water and the white mud around the well to nourish Yggdrasil, keeping it from rotting. Two swans also feed at the well, and from these all swans in the world are descended.

== Scholarly Theories ==

Parallels have been pointed out between the description of Urðarbrunnr at the base of the world tree Yggdrasil and Christian medieval chronicler Adam of Bremen's account of a wellspring at the base of a sacred tree at the Temple at Uppsala, Sweden, found in his 11th century work Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum. The Temple at Uppsala was a major center of Norse religious practice in Sweden.

Eilífr Goðrúnarson's Christianity-influenced account associates the wellspring with the south and Rome. Theories have been proposed that this description may have some relation to notions of the Jordan River due to phonetic and typological similarities.
